ACAPS Thematic Report: Ukraine - Humanitarian implications of the war in Ukrainian-controlled territory in Khersonska oblast, 20 March 2025

**SUMMARY**

Between December 2024 and February 2025, there was a significant increase in Russian artillery shelling in Khersonska oblast in territory under Government of Ukraine (GoU) control. Air attacks, especially drone attacks targeting civilians, also initially increased in the December–January period (a trend that had started in July 2024) before dipping in February 2025. The increase in the frequency and intensity of attacks and increased targeting of civilians have led to more deaths, injuries, and damage to civilian infrastructure, deteriorating already severe living conditions for civilians. Evacuation orders (mandatory for children under 18 and their caregivers) have been imposed in 50 towns and cities. Despite continued attacks across the whole of Kherson, the orders include only its Hidropark and Naftohavan districts located closest to the Dnipro River. Because of this, the 66,000 inhabitants of Kherson – currently the largest Ukrainian city under direct Russian shelling – remain at constant risk of shelling and air attacks as the city lacks sufficient air defence and bomb shelters to protect residents.

By January 2025, 141,000 people (99% of all residents of the Ukrainian-controlled territory of the oblast) were considered in need (OCHA 16/01/2025). Humanitarian needs are high, with 97% of surveyed families in Khersonska oblast (Ukrainian-controlled territory) expressing extreme need (REACH 23/12/2024). The most pressing needs relate to livelihood opportunities and housing, either the repair of damaged houses or provision of temporary alternatives for those unable to return to areas under constant shelling. With businesses closing or leaving Khersonska oblast, job opportunities are scarce, especially in smaller towns and villages. The war has also reduced income for some farmers, as constant shelling and land contamination by landmines and explosive remnants of war (ERW) have reduced access to agricultural land (SI 06/08/2024).