Defining Essential Interventions for GBV survivors and vulnerable population at risk of Gender-Based Violence (GBV) [EN/UK]

Purpose of the document: This document aims to provide guidance on the prioritization of GBV essential  
 interventions directly targeting GBV survivors and vulnerable population at risk of GBV in situations with  
 reduced financial resources and/or limited partner coverage,such as during sudden escalations in violence, new waves of displacement, or in hard-to-reach areas. At the same time, it emphasizes the continued importance of a comprehensive GBV response.

Introduction: Prioritizing Essential GBV Interventions while Ensuring Continuity of Other Services: GBV  
 is a life-threatening protection concern that escalates in crises and conflicts.In humanitarian settings,  
 ensuring the continuity of GBV interventions is critical, particularly when financial constraints or reduced  
 operational capacity limit the scope of response. In the context of Ukraine, where the needs of women and girls remain acute amidst ongoing conflict and displacement, prioritizing GBV essential interventions is not only a moral imperative but also a strategic necessity. However, while prioritization is crucial, it does not imply the discontinuation of other GBV activities that contribute to a holistic and survivor-centered response. Rather, it calls for a pragmatic approach where life-saving measures are safeguarded, and additional services are maintained where feasible and when foundational life-saving support is secured.

1. GBV as a Life-Threatening Concern: GBV, including but not limited to conflict-related sexual violence,  
     child marriage, and intimate partner violence, poses severe risks:

a. Physical and psychological harm  
 b. Unwanted pregnancies and unsafe abortions  
 c. Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)  
 d. Death

Without adequate services, survivors remain in cycles of violence with limited access to safety, health  
 and/or justice.

2\. Essential GBV Interventions for survivors of GBV and people at risk: The following interventions are  
 considered essential:  
 a. GBV case management: GBV case management is a structured process for providing support to a survivor. It is an essential service that is focused on the GBV survivor's healing and recovery. For more details on this method, please check the Interagency Gender-Based Violence Case Management Guidelines ([link](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/interagency-gender-based-violence-case-management-guidelines?_gl=1*1tkeelg*_ga*MTU2MjM5ODIzLjE3MzQ2MjQwOTI.*_ga_E60ZNX2F68*MTczNTA0NzQwNS4zOC4xLjE3MzUwNDc0NTguNy4wLjA.))  
 ■ As highlighted in the document Providing [*GBV Services Near Frontline Areas: Key Considerations*](https://reliefweb.int/report/ukraine/providing-gbv-services-near-frontline-areas-key-considerations-enuk), GBV case management activities should not be provided in areas near the frontline where the continuity of services and essential safety measures cannot be guaranteed, or where there are no existing essential service providers, such as health facilities, social centers, or emergency mobile teams. Conducting case management without adequate safeguards compromises the ability to provide confidential and effective support to individuals at risk. Ensure that GBV CM activities are available and accessible through WGSS or other service points.

b. Psychosocial support services (mobile and static) to GBV survivors and those at-risk: this service is essential as it provides support to GBV survivors to recover from emotional, psychological and social effects of GBV. PSS (which includes Psychological First Aid or PFA) can be offered through static specialized service providers, (women and girls'safe spaces, survivor relief centers, NGO centers for GBV survivors), mobile teams, hotline psychosocial support by a trained counselor, or online psychotherapeutic support platform.