The EU invests €37 million in Ukraine's nuclear safety, contributing to the repair of damage caused to the Chornobyl Shelter

Today, during the European Commission college visit to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky, the Commission announced the allocation of nearly €37 million to Ukraine from the EU Instrument for Nuclear Safety Cooperation (INSC). The funding will be largely channelled through the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) to support, in particular, critical efforts to repair the damage to the Chornobyl Shelter caused by a Russian drone attack. It will also support the start of dismantling unstable structures, reinforcing Ukraine's commitment to nuclear safety and recovery.

Commissioner for International Partnerships Jozef Síkela said: *"Russian attacks against Ukraine are relentless, but so is our determination to support the attacked country. In addition to all the aid already provided, we are mobilising an additional €37 million, which will allow to repair the damage caused to the Chornobyl Shelter by one of the Russian irresponsible attacks. Furthermore, it will reinforce other key nuclear safety-related projects. Our support for Ukraine's full alignment with the Euratom Acquis continues as we stand united in safeguarding Europe's future.*

The European Union and Ukraine have been collaborating on nuclear safety since the establishment of the Ukrainian state in 1991. This successful cooperation has continued despite the challenges posed by the ongoing war of aggression by the Russian Federation.

Since 1991, the EU has financed more than €1 billion worth of activities in Ukraine for nuclear safety. A key highlight of this support is the €423 million contributed to the Chornobyl Shelter, also known as the New Safe Confinement, through the EBRD. This shelter was hit by an explosive drone on 14 February.

The European Commission currently has over €70 million allocated to ongoing activities in Ukraine, mainly in the Chornobyl zone, to strengthen Ukrainian infrastructure for the safe management of radioactive waste, prepare for radiological emergencies, and ensure Ukraine's continued alignment with the EU's nuclear and radiological legislative framework.