Ukraine: Three years on

The full-scale invasion of Ukraine, three years ago, has left a devastating legacy: entire villages abandoned, homes reduced to rubble, and over 6.8 million Ukrainians displaced worldwide. Even as families consider returning, explosive contamination makes rebuilding their lives dangerous – if not impossible.

In the midst of ongoing conflict, MAG is working to reduce as much as possible the number of people killed or injured by explosive hazards, ensuring that communities can safely return home, and farmers can once again cultivate their land.

Many of our staff – former teachers, bakers, salespeople, divers, and truck drivers – have undergone extensive training, transforming their lives overnight to support their nation’s recovery.

Mine clearance is the key to restoring access to homes, schools, healthcare, water, and energy. It allows reconstruction to begin and communities to come back to life. Demining is the first step toward recovery.

“With Ukraine now entering its fourth year since the full-scale invasion, mines and explosive ordnance remain a deadly threat to civilians,” says Jon Cunliffe, MAG Ukraine Country Director.

“Whilst the total area of land considered as contaminated in Ukraine has been reduced to 139,000km2 through the hard work of Ukrainian deminers, contamination continues to increase every day – especially near front line areas.”

With continued support, MAG Ukraine is expanding its efforts. In 2025, we plan to deploy technical survey dogs, additional mechanical clearance machines, and train new deminers to accelerate land clearance. We are also working toward accreditation for explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) to further our impact.

Demining in Ukraine comes with immense challenges – vast areas of contamination, dangerous terrain, ongoing conflict, and harsh winters that make clearance efforts even more difficult. Despite these obstacles, MAG remains committed to making Ukraine safe.

For those living through the war, the impact of demining is deeply personal.

Larysa, whose village was occupied for seven months, has lost at least 60 neighbours to the war. After her village was liberated, she returned to rebuild her home.

“We hope that the village will be cleared of explosives as soon as possible. It will help create jobs and people will be motivated to return. The infrastructure is ruined: we had a kindergarten, a local club and village council, a post office and grocery stores. Now there's nothing.”

This is one of thousands of similar stories.

As Ukraine works toward a future of peace and stability, international cooperation and continued support for demining efforts will be essential to ensure the safety of civilians and allow communities to rebuild without fear of further loss of life.

For MAG deminer, Nika, the future is clear: “I imagine walking along my hometown one day and seeing signs of mine-free land. We are very motivated because we know we’re doing something to help our country recover faster”.

Community Liaison Officer, Dmytro, echoes Nika’s determination: “Our mission is just beginning,” he says. “New mine-affected communities will emerge. We'll be busy for many years to come.”

[**Watch a short video about MAG's work on the ground:**](https://www.maginternational.org/whats-happening/ukraine-three-years-on/)