Ukraine Situation/Romania: Post Distribution Monitoring - Cash for Refugees with Specific Needs, October 2024

**Summary**

Since the beginning of the international conflict in Ukraine on 24th February 2022 until the end of October 2024, more than 7.7 million border crossings of refugees from Ukraine were recorded by Romania, directly from Ukraine and via the Republic of Moldova, and 175,331 individuals have been issued Temporary Protection.

A high proportion of refugees from Ukraine can be exposed to protection-related risks, including gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, the separation of children and human trafficking, especially considering that most arrivals have been women and children. These risks and harmful coping mechanisms are exacerbated by the depletion of savings that refugees may have brought with them.

On 1 April 2024, UNHCR Romania launched the Cash for Refugees with Specific Needs programme. The programme is complementary to the governmental assistance providing four instalments plus a top-up, each in value of 630 RON per individual (eg. 130 USD), to the most vulnerable households residing in Romania. The programme aimed to enable vulnerable refugees to cope with their basic needs and other specific needs, have a smoother integration and prevent negative coping mechanisms. In order to identify the most vulnerable households, UNHCR, together with 20 partner organizations consisting of some government entities, UN agencies and NGOs, recalibrated, and revalidated the inter-agency vulnerability scorecard in line with socio economics assessment’s findings and latest realities in the country. Overall, UNHCR assessed 13,305 refugees, and assisted the most vulnerable 5,691 during the April to September 2024 period.

As part of the efforts to monitor the quality-of-service delivery and to ensure accountability to the affected population, UNHCR conducted a Post-Distribution Monitoring (PDM) survey to assess the Cash for Refugees with Specific Needs programme in Romania. This document presents the findings of this survey structured in eight sections as follows: (1) Demographic characteristics of the sample, (2) Methodology, (3) Receiving and spending the cash assistance, (4) Risks in accessing the assistance, (5) Access or availability of goods in the local market and prices (6) Outcomes, (7) Coping mechanisms, and (8) Accountability to the affected population.

The results from the Post Distribution Monitoring survey confirm that the Cash for Refugees with Specific Needs programme has increasingly targeted the vulnerable refugee population from Ukraine, helping them meet their basic needs and cover other expenses related to their households' well-being.

Post Distribution Monitoring showed that the Cash for Refugees with Specific Needs programme beneficiaries received the amount they expected at the time they expected. The majority of respondents spent the received amount to cover households' basic needs such as food, health care, rent, utilities and clothing. Moreover, beneficiaries were able to cover some of the expenses specifically due to cash assistance received. The cash assistance also helped respondents and their family members to not be engaged in harmful activities, as well as reduced stress within the household. It is also important to note that respondents reported that they know how to contact UNHCR if needed to report complaints or feedback.