UNHCR’s Grandi urges world to remember Ukraine’s displaced and war-affected people

*This statement is attributable to Filippo Grandi, UN High Commissioner for Refugees.*

As we mark three years of devastating war in Ukraine, millions of ordinary Ukrainians – one third of the current population – are in desperate need of humanitarian aid. Their plight should be uppermost in everyone's minds, even as political events take centre stage.

Around 10.6 million people have been forced from their homes, seeking safety either within Ukraine or abroad. Most fled during the terrifying early stages of the Russian invasion, but massive and incessant aerial attacks continue to kill, injure and displace people every day. In the last six months alone, more than 200,000 people have been evacuated from frontline areas in the east and north.

Relentless attacks on critical civilian infrastructure, including energy plants, have left many without heat and electricity. More than 2 million homes across the country – 10 per cent of the housing stock – have been damaged or destroyed.

For Ukrainians, the pull of home is strong. However, while 60 per cent of refugees hope to return, insecurity, housing shortages and limited job opportunities keep most from doing so for now. When conditions improve and voluntary returns become more feasible, emergency shelter and humanitarian aid will play a crucial role in the rebuilding process.

From the first days of the war, UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency, has been supporting the humanitarian response and recovery efforts in Ukraine and in countries generously hosting almost 7 million refugees.

We and our many local partners are providing vital assistance. Emergency shelter kits help people escape the elements, while financial assistance allows them to buy basic necessities. Psychosocial first aid offers immediate mental health relief, helping individuals cope with the trauma of this devastating war.

Together with the government, UNHCR has helped people rebuild their war-damaged homes, restore lost documents and access compensation. We ensure that displaced individuals receive accurate, up-to-date information about available services and support, helping them make informed decisions about their future.

As we reach this bleak, bloody milestone, UNHCR will remain on the ground in Ukraine – contributing to the country’s recovery and ready to support people who wish to return once the skies are free from missiles and drones.

However, the scale of the destruction and the huge numbers of displaced people make recovery a daunting task that will not happen overnight. Help must go to people in war-damaged homes, and to those who have lost their homes entirely. After three years of hostilities and bombardment, people have lost jobs, schools, communities, and loved ones. They will need all our support.

The killing of civilians, the incessant attacks and the destruction of homes and civilian infrastructure must stop. The process of recovery and reconstruction must continue.